---
title:      'The Noise Protocol Framework'
author:     'Trevor Perrin (noise@trevp.net)'
revision:   '29'
date:       '2016-05-17'
---

1. Introduction
================

Noise is a framework for crypto protocols based on Diffie-Hellman key
agreement.  Noise can describe protocols that consist of a single message as
well as interactive protocols.

2. Overview
============

2.1. Terminology
-----------------

A Noise protocol begins with two parties exchanging **handshake messages**.
During this **handshake phase** the parties exchange DH public keys and perform
a sequence of DH operations, hashing the DH results into a shared secret key.
After the handshake phase each party can use this shared key to send encrypted
**transport messages**.

The Noise framework supports handshakes where each party has a long-term
**static key pair** and/or an **ephemeral key pair**.  A Noise handshake is
described by a simple language.  This language consists of **tokens** which are
arranged into **message patterns**.  Message patterns are arranged into
**handshake patterns**.

A **message pattern** is a sequence of tokens that specifies the DH public keys
that comprise a handshake message, and the DH operations that are performed
when sending or receiving that message.  A **handshake pattern** specifies the
sequential exchange of messages that comprise a handshake.

A handshake pattern can be instantiated by **DH functions**, **cipher
functions**, and a **hash function** to give a concrete **Noise protocol**.

2.2. Overview of handshake state machine
-----------------------------------------

The core of Noise is a set of variables maintained by each party during a
handshake, and rules for sending and receiving handshake messages by
sequentially processing the tokens from a message pattern.

Each party maintains the following variables:

 * **`s, e`**: The local party's static and ephemeral key pairs (which may be
   empty).

 * **`rs, re`**: The remote party's static and ephemeral public keys (which may
   be empty).

 * **`h`**: A **handshake hash** value that hashes all the handshake data that's
   been sent and received.

 * **`ck`**: A **chaining key** that hashes all previous DH outputs.  Once the
   handshake completes, the chaining key will be used to derive the encryption
   keys for transport messages.
 
 * **`k, n`**: An encryption key `k` (which may be empty) and a counter-based
   nonce `n`.  Whenever a new DH output causes a new `ck` to be calculated, a
   new `k` is also calculated.  The key `k` and nonce `n` are used to encrypt
   static public keys and handshake payloads.  Encryption with `k` uses an
   "AEAD" cipher mode and includes the current `h` value as "associated data"
   which is covered by the AEAD authentication.  Encryption of static public
   keys and payloads provides some confidentiality and key confirmation during
   the handshake phase.

A handshake message consists of some DH public keys followed by a **payload**.
The payload may contain certificates or other data chosen by the application.
To send a handshake message, the sender specifies the payload and sequentially
processes each token from a message pattern.  The possible tokens are:

 * **`"e"`**: The sender generates a new ephemeral key pair and stores it in
   the `e` variable, writes the ephemeral public key as cleartext into the
   message buffer, and hashes the public key along with the old `h` to derive a
   new `h`.

 * **`"s"`**: The sender writes its static public key from the `s` variable
   into the message buffer, encrypting it if `k` is non-empty, and hashes the
   output along with the old `h` to derive a new `h`.

 * **`"dhee", "dhse", "dhes", "dhss"`**: The sender performs a DH between its
   corresponding local key pair (whether `s` or `e` is determined by the first
   letter following `"dh"`) and the remote public key (whether `rs` or `re` is
   determined by the second letter following `"dh"`).  The result is hashed
   along with the old `ck` to derive a new `ck` and `k`, and `n` is set to
   zero.

After processing the final token in a handshake message, the sender then writes
the payload into the message buffer, encrypting it if `k` is non-empty, and
hashes the output along with the old `h` to derive a new `h`.

As a simple example, an unauthenticated DH handshake is described by the
handshake pattern:

      -> e
      <- e, dhee    

The **initiator** sends the first message, which is simply an ephemeral public key.
The **responder** sends back its own ephemeral public key.  Then a DH is performed
and the output is hashed into a shared secret key.

Note that a cleartext payload is sent in the first message, after the cleartext
ephemeral public key, and an encrypted payload is sent in the response message,
after the cleartext ephemeral public key.  The application may send whatever
payloads it wants.

The responder can send its static public key (under encryption) and
authenticate itself via a slightly different pattern:

      -> e
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse

In this case, the final `ck` and `k` values are a hash of both DH results.
Since the `dhse` token indicates a DH between the initiator's ephemeral key and
the responder's static key, successful decryption by the initiator of the
second message's payload serves to authenticate the responder to the initiator.

Note that the second message's payload may contain a zero-length plaintext, but
the payload ciphertext will still contain authentication data (such as an
authentication tag or "synthetic IV"), since encryption is with an AEAD mode.
The second message's payload can also be used to deliver certificates for the
responder's static public key.

The initiator can send *its* static public key (under encryption), and
authenticate itself, using a handshake pattern with one additional message:

      -> e
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse
      -> s, dhse

The following sections flesh out the details, and add some complications.
However, the core of Noise is this simple system of variables, tokens, and
processing rules, which allow concise expression of a range of protocols.

3.  Message format
===================

All Noise messages are less than or equal to 65535 bytes in length.
Restricting message size has several advantages:

 * Simpler testing, since it's easy to test the maximum sizes.

 * Reduces the likelihood of errors in memory handling, or integer overflow. 

 * Enables support for streaming decryption and random-access decryption of
   large data streams.

 * Enables higher-level protocols that encapsulate Noise messages to use an efficient
 standard length field of 16 bits.

All Noise messages can be processed without parsing, since there are no type or
length fields.  Of course, Noise messages might be encapsulated within a
higher-level protocol that contains type and length information.  Noise
messages might encapsulate payloads that require parsing of some sort, but
payloads are handled by the application, not by Noise.

A Noise **transport message** is simply an AEAD ciphertext that is less than or
equal to 65535 bytes in length, and that consists of an encrypted payload plus
16 bytes of authentication data.  The details depend on the AEAD cipher
function, e.g. AES256-GCM, or ChaCha20-Poly1305, but typically the
authentication data is either a 16-byte authentication tag appended to the
ciphertext, or a 16-byte synthetic IV prepended to the ciphertext.

A Noise **handshake message** is also less than or equal to 65535 bytes.  It
begins with a sequence of one or more DH public keys, as determined by its
message pattern.  Following the public keys will be a single payload which can
be used to convey certificates or other handshake data, but can also contain a
zero-length plaintext.

Static public keys and payloads will be in cleartext if they are sent in a
handshake prior to a DH operation, and will be AEAD ciphertexts if
they occur after a DH operation.  (If Noise is being used with pre-shared
symmetric keys, this rule is different: *all* static public keys and payloads
will be encrypted; see [Section 7](#pre-shared-symmetric-keys)).  Like transport messages, AEAD
ciphertexts will expand each encrypted field (whether static public key or
payload) by 16 bytes.

For an example, consider the handshake pattern:

      -> e
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse
      -> s, dhse

The first message consists of a cleartext public key (`"e"`) followed by a
cleartext payload (remember that a payload is implicit at the end of each
message pattern).  The second message consists of a cleartext public key
(`"e"`) followed by an encrypted public key (`"s"`) followed by an encrypted
payload.  The third message consists of an encrypted public key (`"s"`)
followed by an encrypted payload.  

Assuming each payload contains a zero-length plaintext, and DH public keys are
56 bytes, the message sizes will be:

 1. 56 bytes (one cleartext public key and a cleartext payload)
 2. 144 bytes (two public keys, the second encrypted, and encrypted payload)
 3. 88 bytes (one encrypted public key and encrypted payload)

If pre-shared symmetric keys are used, the first message grows in size to 72
bytes, since the first payload becomes encrypted.

4. Crypto functions
=====================

A Noise protocol is instantiated with a concrete set of **DH functions**,
**cipher functions**, and a **hash function**.  The signature for these
functions is defined below.  Some concrete functions are defined in [Section
10](#dh-functions-cipher-functions-and-hash-functions).

The following notation will be used in algorithm pseudocode:

 * The `||` operator concatenates byte sequences.
 * The `byte()` function constructs a single byte.

4.1. DH functions
------------------

Noise depends on the following **DH functions** (and an associated constant):

 * **`GENERATE_KEYPAIR()`**: Generates a new DH key pair.  A DH key pair
   consists of `public_key` and `private_key` elements.  A `public_key`
   represents an encoding of a DH public key into a byte sequence of
   length `DHLEN`.  The `public_key` encoding details are specific to each set
   of DH functions.

 * **`DH(key_pair, public_key)`**: Performs a DH calculation between the
   private key in `key_pair` and `public_key` and returns an output sequence of
   bytes of length `DHLEN`.  If the function detects an invalid `public_key`,
   the output may be all zeros or any other value that doesn't leak information
   about the private key.  For reasons discussed in [Section 9.1](#dummy-static-public-keys) it is recommended for the function to have a
   **null public key value** that always yields the same output, regardless of
   private key.  For example, the DH functions in [Section 10](#dh-functions-cipher-functions-and-hash-functions) always map a DH public key of all zeros to an output of all zeros.

 * **`DHLEN`** = A constant specifying the size in bytes of public keys and DH
   outputs.  For security reasons, `DHLEN` must be 32 or greater.

4.2. Cipher functions
----------------------

Noise depends on the following **cipher functions**:

 * **`ENCRYPT(k, n, ad, plaintext)`**: Encrypts `plaintext` using the cipher
   key `k` of 32 bytes and an 8-byte unsigned integer nonce `n` which must be
   unique for the key `k`.  Returns the ciphertext.  Encryption must be done
   with an "AEAD" encryption mode with the associated data `ad` and returns a
   ciphertext that is the same size as the plaintext plus 16 bytes for 
   authentication data.  The entire ciphertext must be indistinguishable from
   random if the key is secret. 

 * **`DECRYPT(k, n, ad, ciphertext)`**: Decrypts `ciphertext` using a cipher
   key `k` of 32 bytes, an 8-byte unsigned integer nonce `n`, and associated
   data `ad`.  Returns the plaintext, unless authentication fails, in which
   case an error is signaled to the caller.

4.3. Hash functions
--------------------

Noise depends on the following **hash function** (and associated constants):

 * **`HASH(data)`**: Hashes some arbitrary-length data with a
   collision-resistant cryptographic hash function and returns an output of
   `HASHLEN` bytes.

 * **`HASHLEN`** = A constant specifying the size in bytes of the hash output.
   Must be 32 or 64.

 * **`BLOCKLEN`** = A constant specifying the size in bytes that the hash
   function uses internally to divide its input for iterative processing.  This
   is needed to use the hash function with HMAC (`BLOCKLEN` is `B` in [RFC 2104](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2104.txt)).

Noise defines additional functions based on the above `HASH()` function:

 * **`HMAC-HASH(key, data)`**:  Applies `HMAC` from [RFC 2104](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2104.txt) 
   using the `HASH()` function.  This function is only called as part of `HKDF()`, below.

 * **`HKDF(chaining_key, input_key_material)`**:  Takes a `chaining_key` byte
   sequence of length `HASHLEN`, and an `input_key_material` byte sequence with 
   length either zero bytes, 32 bytes, or `DHLEN` bytes.  Returns two byte sequences of length `HASHLEN`, as
   follows:  
     * Sets `temp_key = HMAC-HASH(chaining_key, input_key_material)`.
     * Sets `output1 = HMAC-HASH(temp_key, byte(0x01))`.
     * Sets `output2 = HMAC-HASH(temp_key, output1 || byte(0x02))`.
     * Returns the pair `(output1, output2)`.

   Note that `temp_key`, `output1`, and `output2` are all `HASHLEN` bytes in
   length.  Also note that the `HKDF()` function is simply `HKDF` from [RFC 5869](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5869.txt) 
   with the `chaining_key` as HKDF `salt`, and zero-length HKDF `info`.

5. Processing rules
====================

To precisely define the processing rules we adopt an object-oriented
terminology, and present three "objects" which encapsulate state variables and
provide "methods" which implement processing logic.  These three objects are
presented as a hierarchy: each higher-layer object includes one instance of the
object beneath it.  From lowest-layer to highest, the objects are:

 * A **`CipherState`** object contains `k` and `n` variables, which it uses to
   encrypt and decrypt ciphertexts.  During the handshake phase each party has
   a single `CipherState`, but during the transport phase each party has two
   `CipherState` objects: one for sending, and one for receiving.

 * A **`SymmetricState`** object contains a `CipherState` plus `ck` and `h`
   variables.  It is so-named because it encapsulates all the "symmetric
   crypto" used by Noise.  During the handshake phase each party has a single
   `SymmetricState`, which can be deleted once the handshake is finished.

 * A **`HandshakeState`** object contains a `SymmetricState` plus DH variables
   `(s, e, rs, re)` and a variable representing the handshake pattern.
   During the handshake phase each party has a single `HandshakeState`, which
   can be deleted once the handshake is finished.

To execute a Noise protocol you `Initialize()` a `HandshakeState`.  During
initialization you specify the handshake pattern, any local key pairs, and any
public keys for the remote party you have knowledge of.  After `Initialize()`
you call `WriteMessage()` and `ReadMessage()` on the `HandshakeState` to
process each handshake message.  If a decryption error occurs the handshake has
failed and the `HandshakeState` is deleted without sending further messages.

Processing the final handshake message returns two `CipherState` objects, the
first for encrypting transport messages from initiator to responder, and the
second for messages in the other direction.  At that point the `HandshakeState`
may be deleted.  Transport messages are then encrypted and decrypted by calling
`EncryptWithAd()` and `DecryptWithAd()` on the relevant `CipherState` with
zero-length associated data.

The below sections describe these objects in detail.

5.1 The `CipherState` object
-----------------------------

A `CipherState` can encrypt and decrypt data based on its `k` and `n`
variables:

  * **`k`**: A cipher key of 32 bytes (which may be `empty`).  `Empty` is a
    special value which indicates `k` has not yet been initialized.

  * **`n`**: An 8-byte (64-bit) unsigned integer nonce.

A `CipherState` responds to the following methods.  The `++` post-increment
operator applied to `n` means "use the current `n` value, then increment it".
If incrementing `n` causes an arithmetic overflow (i.e. would result in `n`
greater than 2^64 - 1) then any further `EncryptWithAd()` or `DecryptWithAd()`
calls will signal an error to the caller.

  * **`InitializeKey(key)`**:  Sets `k = key`.  Sets `n = 0`.

  * **`HasKey()`**: Returns true if `k` is non-empty, false otherwise.

  * **`EncryptWithAd(ad, plaintext)`**:  If `k` is non-empty returns
    `ENCRYPT(k, n++, ad, plaintext)`.  Otherwise returns `plaintext`.

  * **`DecryptWithAd(ad, ciphertext)`**:  If `k` is non-empty returns
    `DECRYPT(k, n++, ad, ciphertext)`.  Otherwise returns `ciphertext`.  If an
    authentication failure occurs in `DECRYPT()` the error is signaled to the
    caller.

5.2. The `SymmetricState` object
-----------------------------------------

A `SymmetricState` object contains a `CipherState` plus the following
variables:

  * **`ck`**: A chaining key of `HASHLEN` bytes.
  * **`h`**: A hash output of `HASHLEN` bytes.

A `SymmetricState` responds to the following methods:   
 
  * **`InitializeSymmetric(protocol_name)`**:  Takes an arbitrary-length
   `protocol_name` byte sequence (see [Section 11](#protocol-names)).  Executes the following steps:

      * If `protocol_name` is less than or equal to `HASHLEN` bytes in length,
        sets `h` equal to `protocol_name` with zero bytes appended to make
        `HASHLEN` bytes.  Otherwise sets `h = HASH(protocol_name)`.  

      * Sets `ck = h`. 

      * Calls `InitializeKey(empty)`.

  * **`MixKey(input_key_material)`**:  Sets `ck, temp_k = HKDF(ck,
    input_key_material)`.  If `HASHLEN` is 64, then truncates `temp_k` to 32
    bytes.  Calls `InitializeKey(temp_k)`.

  * **`MixHash(data)`**:  Sets `h = HASH(h || data)`.

  * **`EncryptAndHash(plaintext)`**: Sets `ciphertext = EncryptWithAd(h,
    plaintext)`, calls `MixHash(ciphertext)`, and returns `ciphertext`.  Note that if 
    `k` is `empty`, the `EncryptWithAd()` call will set `ciphertext` equal to  `plaintext`.

  * **`DecryptAndHash(ciphertext)`**: Sets `plaintext = DecryptWithAd(h,
    ciphertext)`, calls `MixHash(ciphertext)`, and returns `plaintext`.  Note that if 
    `k` is `empty`, the `DecryptWithAd()` call will set `plaintext` equal to `ciphertext`. 

  * **`Split()`**:  Returns a pair of `CipherState` objects for encrypting
    transport messages.  Executes the following steps, where `zerolen` is a zero-length
    byte sequence:
      * Sets `temp_k1, temp_k2 = HKDF(ck, zerolen)`.
      * If `HASHLEN` is 64, then truncates `temp_k1` and `temp_k2` to 32 bytes.
      * Creates two new `CipherState` objects `sender` and `receiver`.
      * Calls `sender.InitializeKey(temp_k1)` and `receiver.InitializeKey(temp_k2)`.
      * Returns the pair `(sender, receiver)`.  


5.3. The `HandshakeState` object
---------------------------------

A `HandshakeState` object contains a `SymmetricState` plus the following
variables, any of which may be `empty`.  `Empty` is a special value which
indicates the variable has not yet been initialized.

  * **`s`**: The local static key pair 
  * **`e`**: The local ephemeral key pair
  * **`rs`**: The remote party's static public key
  * **`re`**: The remote party's ephemeral public key 

A `HandshakeState` also has a variable to track the remaining portion of the handshake pattern:

  * **`message_patterns`**: A sequence of message patterns.  Each message
    pattern is a sequence of tokens from the set `("s", "e", "dhee", "dhes",
    "dhse", "dhss")`.

A `HandshakeState` responds to the following methods:

  * **`Initialize(handshake_pattern, initiator, prologue, s, e, rs, re)`**:
    Takes a valid `handshake_pattern` (see [Section 8](#handshake-patterns)) and an
    `initiator` boolean specifying this party's role as either initiator or
    responder.  Takes a `prologue` byte sequence which may be zero-length, or
    which may contain context information that both parties want to confirm is
    identical (see [Section 6](#prologue)).  Takes a set of DH key pairs and
    public keys for initializing local variables, any of which may be empty.

      * Derives a `protocol_name` byte sequence by combining the names for the
        handshake pattern and crypto functions, as specified in [Section
        11](#protocol-names). Calls `InitializeSymmetric(protocol_name)`.

      * Calls `MixHash(prologue)`.

      * Sets the `s`, `e`, `rs`, and `re` variables to the corresponding
        arguments.

      * Calls `MixHash()` once for each public key listed in the pre-messages
        from `handshake_pattern`, with the specified public key as input (see
        [Section 8](#handshake-patterns) for an explanation of pre-messages).  If both
        initiator and responder have pre-messages, the initiator's public keys
        are hashed first.

      * Sets `message_patterns` to the message patterns from `handshake_pattern`.

  * **`WriteMessage(payload, message_buffer)`**: Takes a `payload` byte sequence
   which may be zero-length, and a `message_buffer` to write the output into.
  
      * Fetches and deletes the next message pattern from `message_patterns`,
        then sequentially processes each token from the message pattern:

          * For `"e"`:  Sets `e = GENERATE_KEYPAIR()`, overwriting any previous
            value for `e`.  Appends `e.public_key` to the buffer.  Calls
            `MixHash(e.public_key)`.

          * For `"s"`:  Appends `EncryptAndHash(s.public_key)` to the buffer.  

          * For `"dhxy"`:  Calls `MixKey(DH(x, ry))`.

      * Appends `EncryptAndHash(payload)` to the buffer.  

      * If there are no more message patterns returns two new `CipherState`
        objects by calling `Split()`.

  * **`ReadMessage(message, payload_buffer)`**: Takes a byte sequence
    containing a Noise handshake message, and a `payload_buffer` to write the
    message's plaintext payload into.

      * Fetches and deletes the next message pattern from `message_patterns`,
        then sequentially processes each token from the message pattern:

          * For `"e"`: Sets `re` to the next `DHLEN` bytes from the message,
            overwriting any previous value for `re`. Calls `MixHash(re.public_key)`. 

          * For `"s"`: Sets `temp` to the next `DHLEN + 16` bytes of the message if
            `HasKey() == True`, or to the next `DHLEN` bytes otherwise.  Sets `rs`
            to `DecryptAndHash(temp)`.  

          * For `"dhxy"`:  Calls `MixKey(DH(y, rx))`.  

      * Calls `DecryptAndHash()` on the remaining bytes of the message and stores
        the output into `payload_buffer`.

      * If there are no more message patterns returns two new `CipherState`
        objects by calling `Split()`.

6. Prologue 
============

Noise protocols have a **prologue** input which allows arbitrary data to be
hashed into the `h` variable.  If both parties do not provide identical
prologue data, the handshake will fail due to a decryption error.  This is
useful when the parties engaged in negotiation prior to the handshake and want
to ensure they share identical views of that negotiation.  

For example, suppose Bob communicates to Alice a list of Noise protocols that
he is willing to support.  Alice will then choose and execute a single
protocol.  To ensure that a "man-in-the-middle" did not edit Bob's list to
remove options, Alice and Bob could include the list as prologue data.

Note that while the parties confirm their prologues are identical, they don't
mix prologue data into encryption keys.  If an input contains secret data
that's intended to strengthen the encryption, a "PSK" handshake should be used
instead (see next section). 

7. Pre-shared symmetric keys
=============================

Noise provides an optional **pre-shared symmetric key** or **PSK** mode to
support protocols where both parties already have a shared secret key.  When
using pre-shared symmetric keys, the following changes are made:

 * Protocol names ([Section 11](#protocol-names)) use the prefix `"NoisePSK_"` instead of `"Noise_"`.

 * `Initialize()` takes an additional `psk` argument, which is a sequence of
   32 bytes.  Immediately after `MixHash(prologue)` it sets `ck, temp = HKDF(ck, psk)`, 
   then calls `MixHash(temp)`.  This mixes the pre-shared key into the
   chaining key, and also mixes a one-way function of the pre-shared key into
   the `h` value to ensure that `h` is a function of all handshake inputs.

 * `WriteMessage()` and `ReadMessage()` are modified when processing the `"e"`
   token to call `MixKey(e.public_key)` as the final step.  Because the initial
   messages in a handshake pattern are required to start with `"e"` ([Section 8.1](#pattern-validity)), 
   this ensures `k` is initialized from the pre-shared key.  This also uses the
   ephemeral public key's value as a random nonce to prevent re-using the same
   `k` and `n` for different messages.

8. Handshake patterns 
======================

A **message pattern** is some sequence of tokens from the set `("e", "s", "dhee", "dhes", "dhse", "dhss")`.  

A **handshake pattern** consists of:

  * A pattern for the initiator's **pre-message** that is either:
      * `"s"`
      * `"e"`
      * `"s, e"`
      * empty

  * A pattern for the responder's pre-message that takes the same
   range of values as the initiator's pre-message.

  * A sequence of message patterns for the actual handshake messages

The pre-messages represent an exchange of public keys that was somehow
performed prior to the handshake, so these public keys must be inputs to
`Initialize()` for the "recipient" of the pre-message.  

The first actual handshake message is sent from the initiator to the responder,
the next is sent by the responder, the next from the initiator, and so on in
alternating fashion. 

The following handshake pattern describes an unauthenticated DH handshake:

    Noise_NN():
      -> e
      <- e, dhee

The handshake pattern name is `Noise_NN`.  This naming convention will be
explained in [Section 8.3](#interactive-patterns).  The empty parentheses indicate that
neither party is initialized with any key pairs.  The tokens `"s"` and/or `"e"`
inside the parentheses would indicate that the initiator is initialized with
static and/or ephemeral key pairs.  The tokens `"rs"` and/or `"re"` would
indicate the same thing for the responder.

Pre-messages are shown as patterns prior to the delimiter "...", with a
right-pointing arrow for the initiator's pre-message, and a left-pointing arrow
for the responder's pre-message.  If both parties have a pre-message, the
initiator's is listed first (and hashed first).  During `Initialize()`,
`MixHash()` is called on any pre-message public keys, as described in [Section
5.3](#the-handshakestate-object).

The following pattern describes a handshake where the initiator has
pre-knowledge of the responder's static public key, and performs a DH with the
responder's static public key as well as the responder's ephemeral public key.
This pre-knowledge allows an encrypted payload to be sent in the first message,
although full forward secrecy and replay protection is only achieved with the
second message.

    Noise_NK(rs):
      <- s
      ...
      -> e, dhes 
      <- e, dhee

8.1 Pattern validity 
----------------------

Handshake patterns must be **valid** in the following senses:

 1. Parties can only send a static public key if they were initialized with a
   static key pair, and can only perform DH between private keys and public
   keys they possess.

 2. Parties must not send their static public key, or a fresh ephemeral public
   key, more than once per handshake.  

 3. Parties must send a fresh ephemeral public key at the start of the first
   message they send (i.e. the first token of the first message pattern in each
   direction must be `"e"`).

 4. After performing a DH between a remote public key and any local private key
   that is not a "fresh" ephemeral private key, the local party must not send
   any encrypted data unless they have also performed a DH between a "fresh"
   ephemeral private key and the remote public key.  A "fresh" ephemeral
   private key is one that was created by processing an `"e"` token when
   sending a message (as opposed to a "semi-ephemeral" private key passed in during
   initialization).

Patterns failing the first check are obviously nonsense.

The second check outlaws redundant transmission of values to simplify
implementation and testing.

The third and fourth checks are necessary because Noise uses DH outputs
involving ephemeral keys to randomize the shared secret keys.  Noise also uses
ephemeral public keys to randomize PSK-based encryption.  Patterns failing
these checks could result in subtle but catastrophic security flaws.  

Users are recommended to only use the handshake patterns listed below, or other
patterns that have been vetted by experts to satisfy the above checks.

8.2. One-way patterns 
----------------------

The following example handshake patterns represent "one-way" handshakes
supporting a one-way stream of data from a sender to a recipient.  These
patterns could be used to encrypt files, database records, or other
non-interactive data streams.

Following a one-way handshake the sender can send a stream of transport
messages, encrypting them using the first `CipherState` returned by `Split()`.
The second `CipherState` from `Split()` is discarded - the recipient must not
send any messages using it (as this would violate the rules in [Section 8.1](#pattern-validity)).

    Naming convention for one-way patterns:    
      N = no static key for sender
      K = static key for sender known to recipient
      X = static key for sender transmitted to recipient

    Noise_N(rs):
      <- s
      ...
      -> e, dhes

    Noise_K(s, rs):
      -> s
      <- s
      ...
      -> e, dhes, dhss

    Noise_X(s, rs):
      <- s
      ...
      -> e, dhes, s, dhss

`Noise_N` is a conventional DH-based public-key encryption.  The other patterns
add sender authentication, where the sender's public key is either known to the
recipient beforehand (`Noise_K`) or transmitted under encryption (`Noise_X`).

8.3. Interactive patterns 
--------------------------

The following example handshake patterns represent interactive protocols.

    Naming convention for interactive patterns:

      N_ = no static key for initiator
      K_ = static key for initiator known to responder
      X_ = static key for initiator transmitted to responder
      I_ = static key for initiator immediately transmitted to responder,
           despite reduced or absent identity-hiding
  
      _N = no static key for responder
      _K = static key for responder known to initiator
      _X = static key for responder transmitted to initiator


    Noise_NN():                      Noise_KN(s):              
      -> e                             -> s                       
      <- e, dhee                       ...                        
                                       -> e                       
                                       <- e, dhee, dhes           
                                             
    Noise_NK(rs):                    Noise_KK(s, rs):
      <- s                             -> s                       
      ...                              <- s                       
      -> e, dhes                       ...                        
      <- e, dhee                       -> e, dhes, dhss           
                                       <- e, dhee, dhes           
                                              
    Noise_NX(rs):                    Noise_KX(s, rs):          
      -> e                             -> s                       
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse              ...                        
                                       -> e                       
                                       <- e, dhee, dhes, s, dhse  


    Noise_XN(s):                     Noise_IN(s):
      -> e                             -> e, s
      <- e, dhee                       <- e, dhee, dhes             
      -> s, dhse                                                     
                                         
    Noise_XK(s, rs):                 Noise_IK(s, rs):            
      <- s                             <- s                         
      ...                              ...                          
      -> e, dhes                       -> e, dhes, s, dhss          
      <- e, dhee                       <- e, dhee, dhes             
      -> s, dhse                                                     
                                        
    Noise_XX(s, rs):                 Noise_IX(s, rs):
      -> e                             -> e, s
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse              <- e, dhee, dhes, s, dhse 
      -> s, dhse

The `Noise_XX` pattern is the most generically useful, since it is efficient
and supports mutual authentication and transmission of static public keys.

All interactive patterns allow some encryption of handshake payloads:

 * Patterns where the initiator has pre-knowledge of the responder's static
   public key (i.e. patterns ending in `"K"`) allow "zero-RTT" encryption,
   meaning the initiator can encrypt the first handshake payload.  

 * All interactive patterns allow "half-RTT" encryption of the first response
   payload, but the encryption only targets an initiator static public key in
   patterns starting with "K" or "I".

The security properties for handshake payloads are usually weaker than the
final security properties achieved by transport payloads, so these early
encryptions must be used with caution.

In some patterns the security properties of transport payloads can also vary.
In particular: patterns starting with "K" or "I" have the caveat that the
responder is only guaranteed "weak" forward secrecy for the transport messages
it sends until it receives a transport message from the initiator.  After
receiving a transport message from the initiator, the responder becomes assured
of "strong" forward secrecy.

The next section provides more analysis of these payload security properties.

8.4. Payload security properties
---------------------------------

The following table lists the security properties for Noise handshake and
transport payloads for all the named patterns in [Section 8.2](#one-way-patterns) and
[Section 8.3](#interactive-patterns).  Each payload is assigned an "authentication"
property regarding the degree of authentication of the sender provided to the
recipient, and a "confidentiality" property regarding the degree of
confidentiality provided to the sender.

The authentication properties are:

 0. **No authentication.**  This payload may have been sent by any party,
    including an active attacker.

 1. **Sender authentication *vulnerable* to key-compromise impersonation
    (KCI)**.  The sender authentication is based on a static-static DH
    (`"dhss"`) involving both parties' static key pairs.  If the recipient's
    long-term private key has been compromised, this authentication can be
    forged.  Note that a future version of Noise might include signatures,
    which could improve this security property, but brings other trade-offs.

 2. **Sender authentication *resistant* to key-compromise impersonation
    (KCI)**.  The sender authentication is based on an ephemeral-static DH
    (`"dhes"` or `"dhse"`) between the sender's static key pair and the
    recipient's ephemeral key pair.  Assuming the corresponding private keys 
    are secure, this authentication cannot be forged.

The confidentiality properties are:

 0. **No confidentiality.**  This payload is sent in cleartext.

 1. **Encryption to an ephemeral recipient.**  This payload has forward
    secrecy, since encryption involves an ephemeral-ephemeral DH (`"dhee"`).
    However, the sender has not authenticated the recipient, so this payload
    might be sent to any party, including an active attacker.

 2. **Encryption to a known recipient, forward secrecy for sender
    compromise only, vulnerable to replay.** This payload is encrypted based
    only on DHs involving the recipient's static key pair.  If the recipient's
    static private key is compromised, even at a later date, this payload can
    be decrypted.  This message can also be replayed, since there's no
    ephemeral contribution from the recipient.

 3. **Encryption to a known recipient, weak forward secrecy.**  This
    payload is encrypted based on an ephemeral-ephemeral DH and also an
    ephemeral-static DH involving the recipient's static key pair.  However,
    the binding between the recipient's alleged ephemeral public key and the
    recipient's static public key hasn't been verified by the sender, so the
    recipient's alleged ephemeral public key may have been forged by an active
    attacker.  In this case, the attacker could later compromise the
    recipient's static private key to decrypt the payload. Note that a future
    version of Noise might include signatures, which could improve this
    security property, but brings other trade-offs.

 4. **Encryption to a known recipient, weak forward secrecy if the
    sender's private key has been compromised.**  This payload is encrypted
    based on an ephemeral-ephemeral DH, and also based on an ephemeral-static
    DH involving the recipient's static key pair.  However, the binding
    between the recipient's alleged ephemeral public and the recipient's
    static public key has only been verified based on DHs involving both those
    public keys and the sender's static private key.  Thus, if the sender's
    static private key was previously compromised, the recipient's alleged
    ephemeral public key may have been forged by an active attacker.  In this
    case, the attacker could later compromise the intended recipient's static
    private key to decrypt the payload (this is a variant of a "KCI" attack
    enabling a "weak forward secrecy" attack). Note that a future version of
    Noise might include signatures, which could improve this security
    property, but brings other trade-offs.

 5. **Encryption to a known recipient, strong forward secrecy.**  This
    payload is encrypted based on an ephemeral-ephemeral DH as well as an
    ephemeral-static DH with the recipient's static key pair.  Assuming the
    ephemeral private keys are secure, and the recipient is not being actively
    impersonated by an attacker that has stolen its static private key, this
    payload cannot be decrypted.

For one-way handshakes, the below-listed security properties apply to the
handshake payload as well as transport payloads.

For interactive handshakes, security properties are listed for each handshake
payload.  Transport payloads are listed as arrows without a pattern.  Transport
payloads are only listed if they have different security properties than the
previous handshake payload sent from the same party.  If two transport payloads
are listed, the security properties for the second only apply if the first was
received.

                             Authentication   Confidentiality
                             --------------   ---------------
    Noise_N                         0                2
    Noise_K                         1                2
    Noise_X                         1                2                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
    Noise_NN                                                            
      -> e                          0                0
      <- e, dhee                    0                1
      ->                            0                1
                                                                        
    Noise_NK                                                            
      <- s                                                              
      ...                                                               
      -> e, dhes                    0                2                 
      <- e, dhee                    2                1                 
      ->                            0                5                 
                                                                        
    Noise_NX                                                            
      -> e                          0                0                  
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse           2                1                 
      ->                            0                5                 
                                                                        
                                                                        
    Noise_XN                                                            
      -> e                          0                0                 
      <- e, dhee                    0                1                 
      -> s, dhse                    2                1                 
      <-                            0                5                 
                                                                        
    Noise_XK                                                            
      <- s                                                              
      ...                                                               
      -> e, dhes                    0                2                 
      <- e, dhee                    2                1                 
      -> s, dhse                    2                5                 
      <-                            2                5                 
                                                                        
    Noise_XX                                                            
     -> e                           0                0                 
     <- e, dhee, s, dhse            2                1                 
     -> s, dhse                     2                5                 
     <-                             2                5                 


    Noise_KN                                                            
      -> s                                                              
      ...                                                               
      -> e                          0                0                  
      <- e, dhee, dhes              0                3                 
      ->                            2                1                 
      <-                            0                5                 
                                                                        
    Noise_KK                                                            
      -> s                                                              
      <- s                                                              
      ...                                                               
      -> e, dhes, dhss              1                2                 
      <- e, dhee, dhes              2                4                 
      ->                            2                5                 
      <-                            2                5                 
                                                                     
    Noise_KX                                                            
      -> s                                                              
      ...                                                               
      -> e                          0                0               
      <- e, dhee, dhes, s, dhse     2                3               
      ->                            2                5               
      <-                            2                5               
                                                                     
                                                                     
    Noise_IN                                                         
      -> e, s                       0                0               
      <- e, dhee, dhes              0                3               
      ->                            2                1               
      <-                            0                5               
                                                                     
    Noise_IK                                                         
      <- s                                                           
      ...                                                            
      -> e, dhes, s, dhss           1                2               
      <- e, dhee, dhes              2                4               
      ->                            2                5               
      <-                            2                5               
                                                                     
    Noise_IX                                                         
      -> e, s                       0                0               
      <- e, dhee, dhes, s, dhse     2                3               
      ->                            2                5               
      <-                            2                5               

8.5. Identity hiding
---------------------

The following table lists the identity hiding properties for all the named
patterns in [Section 8.2](#one-way-patterns) and [Section 8.3](#interactive-patterns).  Each
pattern is assigned properties describing the confidentiality supplied to the
initiator's static public key, and to the responder's static public key.  The
underlying assumptions are that ephemeral private keys are secure, and that
parties abort the handshake if they receive a static public key from the other
party which they don't trust.

This section only considers identity leakage through static public key fields
in handshakes.  Of course, the identities of Noise participants might be
exposed through other means, including payload fields, traffic analysis, or
metadata such as IP addresses.

The properties for the relevant public key are:

  0. Transmitted in clear.

  1. Encrypted with forward secrecy, but can be probed by an
     anonymous initiator.

  2. Encrypted with forward secrecy, but sent to an anonymous responder. 

  3. Not transmitted, but a passive attacker can check candidates for
     the responder's private key and determine whether the candidate is correct.

  4. Encrypted to responder's static public key, without forward secrecy.
     If an attacker learns the responder's private key they can decrypt the
     initiator's public key. 

  5. Not transmitted, but a passive attacker can check candidates for
     the responder's private key and initiator's public key and determine if
     both candidates are correct.

  6. Encrypted but with weak forward secrecy.  An active attacker who
     pretends to be the initiator without the initiator's static private key,
     then later learns the initiator private key, can then decrypt the
     responder's public key.

  7. Not transmitted, but an active attacker who pretends to be the
     initator without the initiator's static private key, then later learns a
     candidate for the initiator private key, can then check whether the
     candidate is correct.

  8. Encrypted with forward secrecy to an authenticated party.

<!-- end of list - necesary to trick Markdown into seeing the following -->

               Initiator      Responder              
               ---------      ---------
    Noise_N        -              3
    Noise_K        5              5
    Noise_X        4              3
    Noise_NN       -              -
    Noise_NK       -              3
    Noise_NX       -              1
    Noise_XN       2              -
    Noise_XK       8              3
    Noise_XX       8              1
    Noise_KN       7              -
    Noise_KK       5              5
    Noise_KX       7              6
    Noise_IN       0              -
    Noise_IK       4              3
    Noise_IX       0              6



8.6. More patterns 
--------------------

The patterns in the previous sections are useful examples which we are naming
for convenience.  Other valid patterns could be constructed, for example:

 * It would be easy to modify `Noise_X` or `Noise_IK` to transmit the sender's
   static public key in cleartext instead of encrypted by changing `"e, dhes, s, dhss"` to 
   `"e, s, dhes, dhss"`.  This would worsen identity hiding, so we're not 
   bothering to name those patterns.

 * It would be easy to make `Noise_KK` or `Noise_IK` slightly more efficient by
   removing the `"dhss"`.  This would worsen security properties for the
   initial exchange of handshake payloads, so we're not bothering to name those
   patterns.

 * In some patterns both initiator and responder have a static key pair, but
   `"dhss"` is not performed.  This DH operation could be added to provide more
   resilience in case the ephemerals are generated by a bad RNG.

 * Pre-knowledge of ephemeral public keys is not demonstrated in any of the
   above patterns.  This pre-knowledge could be used to implement a "pre-key"
   or "semi-ephemeral key" handshake, where the forward-secrecy and
   KCI-resistance of zero-RTT data is improved since the pre-distributed
   "semi-ephemeral" key can be changed more frequently than the responder's
   static key.  These patterns might benefit from signatures, which are not yet
   included in Noise.  These patterns also introduce new complexity around the
   lifetimes of semi-ephemeral key pairs, so are not discussed further here.

9. Advanced uses
=================

9.1. Dummy static public keys
------------------------------

Consider a protocol where an initiator will authenticate herself if requested by
the responder.  This could be viewed as the initiator choosing between patterns
like `Noise_NX` and `Noise_XX` based on some value inside the responder's first
handshake payload.  

Noise doesn't directly support this.  Instead, this could be simulated by
always executing `Noise_XX`.  The initiator can simulate the `Noise_NX` case by
sending a **dummy static public key** if authentication is not requested.  The
value of the dummy public key doesn't matter.  For efficiency, the initiator
can send a null public key value per [Section 4](#crypto-functions) (e.g.  an all-zeros
`25519` value that is guaranteed to produce an all-zeros output).

This technique is simple, since it allows use of a single handshake pattern.
It also doesn't reveal which option was chosen from message sizes.  It could be
extended to allow a `Noise_XX` pattern to support any permutation of
authentications (initiator only, responder only, both, or none).

9.2. Compound protocols and "Noise Pipes"
------------------------------------------

Consider a protocol where the initiator can attempt zero-RTT encryption based
on the responder's static public key.  If the responder has changed his static
public key, the parties will need to switch to a "fallback" handshake where the
responder transmits the new static public key and the initiator resends the
zero-RTT data.

This can be handled by both parties re-initializing their `HandshakeState` and
executing a different handshake.  Using handshake re-initialization to
switch from one "simple" Noise protocol to another results in a **compound
protocol**.

Public keys that were exchanged in the first handshake can be represented as
pre-messages in the second handshake.  If any negotiation occurred in the first
handshake, the first handshake's `h` variable should be provided as prologue to
the second handshake.

By way of example, this section defines the **Noise Pipe** compound protocol.
This protocol uses three handshake patterns - two defined in the previous
section, and a new one:

 * `Noise_XX` is used for an initial **full handshake** if the parties haven't communicated before, after
which the initiator can cache the responder's static public key.  

 * `Noise_IK` is used for a zero-RTT **abbreviated handshake**.  

 * If the responder fails to decrypt the first `Noise_IK` message (perhaps due
   to changing his static key), the responder will initiate a new **fallback
   handshake** using the `Noise_XXfallback` pattern which is identical to
   `Noise_XX` except re-using the ephemeral public key from the first
   `Noise_IK` message as a pre-message public key.

Below are the three patterns used for Noise Pipes:

    Noise_XX(s, rs):  
      -> e
      <- e, dhee, s, dhse  
      -> s, dhse

    Noise_IK(s, rs):                   
      <- s                         
      ...
      -> e, dhes, s, dhss          
      <- e, dhee, dhes             
                                        
    Noise_XXfallback(s, rs, re):                   
      <- e
      ...
      -> e, dhee, s, dhse
      <- s, dhse

Note that in the fallback case, the initiator and responder roles are switched:
If Alice inititates a `Noise_IK` handshake with Bob, Bob might initiate a
`Noise_XX_fallback` handshake.

There needs to be some way for the recipient of a message to distinguish
whether it's the next message in the current handshake pattern, or requires
re-initialization for a new pattern.  For example, each handshake message could
be preceded by a `type` byte (see [Section 12](#application-responsibilities)).  This byte is not
part of the Noise message proper, but simply signals when re-initialization is
needed.  It could have the following meanings:

 * If `type == 0` in the initiator's first message then the initiator is
   performing a `Noise_XX` handshake *(full handshake)*.

 * If `type == 1` in the initiator's first message then the initiator is
   performing a `Noise_IK` handshake *(attempted abbreviated handshake)*.

 * If `type == 0` in the responder's first `Noise_IK` response then the
   responder accepted the `Noise_IK` message *(successful abbreviated handshake)*.

 * If `type == 1` in the responder's first `Noise_IK` response then the
   responder failed to authenticate the initiator's `Noise_IK` message and is
   performing a `Noise_XXfallback` handshake, using the initiator's ephemeral
   public key as a pre-message *(fallback handshake)*.


9.3. Protocol indistinguishability
-----------------------------------
Parties may wish to hide what protocol they are executing from an eavesdropper.
For example, suppose parties are using Noise Pipes, and want to hide whether
they are performing a full handshake, abbreviated handshake, or fallback
handshake.  

This is fairly easy:

 * The first three messages have their payloads padded with random bytes to
   a constant size, regardless of which handshake is executed.

 * Instead of a `type` byte, the responder uses trial decryption to
   differentiate between an initial message using `Noise_XX` or `Noise_IK`

 * Instead of a `type` byte, an initiator who sent a `Noise_IK` initial
   message uses trial decryption to differentiate between a response using
   `Noise_IK` or `Noise_XXfallback`. 

This leaves the Noise ephemerals in the clear, so an eavesdropper might suspect
the parties are using Noise, even if it can't distinguish the handshakes.  To
make the ephemerals indistinguishable from random, techniques like
[Elligator](https://elligator.cr.yp.to) could be used.


9.4. Channel binding
---------------------
Parties may wish to execute a Noise protocol, then perform authentication at the 
application layer using signatures, passwords, or something else.

To support this, Noise libraries should expose the final value of `h` to the
application as a **handshake hash** which uniquely identifies the Noise
session.

Parties can then sign the handshake hash, or hash it along with their password,
to get an authentication token which has a "channel binding" property: the token
can't be used by the receiving party with a different sesssion.


9.5. Secondary symmetric keys 
------------------------------

To hedge against advances in cryptanalysis allowing decryption of old stored
data, an application might send messages for a second key agreement protocol
inside the Noise handshake payloads.  For example, the second key agreement
could use a post-quantum or non-elliptic curve algorithm that might remain
unbroken even if future cryptanalysis can break the main DH functions.

The second key agreement should derive a 32-byte **secondary symmetric key** `ssk`.  To
make the transport keys a function of both the Noise key agreement and `ssk` the
`Split()` step is modified to call `HKDF(ck, ssk)` instead of `HKDF(ck,
zerolen)`.


10. DH functions, cipher functions, and hash functions
======================================================

10.1. The `25519` DH functions
----------------------------

 * **`GENERATE_KEYPAIR()`**: Returns a new Curve25519 key pair.
 
 * **`DH(keypair, public_key)`**: Executes the Curve25519 DH function (aka "X25519"
   in [RFC 7748](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7748.txt)).  The null public key
   value is all zeros, which will always produce an output of all zeros.  Other
   invalid public key values will also produce an output of all zeros.

 * **`DHLEN`** = 32

10.2. The `448` DH functions
--------------------------

 * **`GENERATE_KEYPAIR()`**: Returns a new Curve448 key pair.
 
 * **`DH(keypair, public_key)`**: Executes the Curve448 DH function (aka "X448" in
   [RFC 7748](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7748.txt)).  The null public key
   value is all zeros, which will always produce an output of all zeros.  Other
   invalid public key values will also produce an output of all zeros.

 * **`DHLEN`** = 56

10.3. The `ChaChaPoly` cipher functions
------------------------------

 * **`ENCRYPT(k, n, ad, plaintext)` / `DECRYPT(k, n, ad, ciphertext)`**:
 `AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305` from [RFC 7539](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7539.txt).  The 96-bit nonce is formed 
 by encoding 32 bits of zeros followed by little-endian encoding of `n`.
 (Earlier implementations of ChaCha20 used a 64-bit nonce; with these implementations it's
 compatible to encode `n` directly into the ChaCha20 nonce without the 32-bit
 zero prefix).

10.4. The `AESGCM` cipher functions
---------------------------

 * **`ENCRYPT(k, n, ad, plaintext)` / `DECRYPT(k, n, ad, ciphertext)`**:
 AES256-GCM from [SP-800-38D](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-38D/SP-800-38D.pdf) with a 128-bit tag appended to the ciphertext.  The 96-bit nonce is formed by encoding 32 bits of zeros followed by big-endian encoding of `n`.

10.5. The `SHA256` hash function
------------------------------

 * **`HASH(input)`**: `SHA-256` from [FIPS 180-4](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips180-4/fips-180-4.pdf).
 * **`HASHLEN`** = 32
 * **`BLOCKLEN`** = 64

10.6. The `SHA512` hash function
------------------------------

 * **`HASH(input)`**: `SHA-512`  from [FIPS 180-4](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips180-4/fips-180-4.pdf).
 * **`HASHLEN`** = 64
 * **`BLOCKLEN`** = 128

10.7. The `BLAKE2s` hash function
-------------------------------

 * **`HASH(input)`**: `BLAKE2s` from [RFC 7693](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7693.txt) with digest length 32.
 * **`HASHLEN`** = 32
 * **`BLOCKLEN`** = 64

10.8. The `BLAKE2b` hash function
-------------------------------

 * **`HASH(input)`**: `BLAKE2b` from [RFC 7693](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7693.txt) with digest length 64.
 * **`HASHLEN`** = 64
 * **`BLOCKLEN`** = 128

11. Protocol names 
===================

To produce a **Noise protocol name** for `Initialize()` you concatenate the
ASCII names for the handshake pattern, the DH functions, the cipher functions,
and the hash function, with underscore separators.  For example: 

 * `Noise_XX_25519_AESGCM_SHA256`
 * `Noise_N_25519_ChaChaPoly_BLAKE2s`
 * `Noise_XXfallback_448_AESGCM_SHA512`
 * `Noise_IK_448_ChaChaPoly_BLAKE2b`

If a pre-shared symmetric key is in use, then the prefix `"NoisePSK_"` is used
instead of `"Noise_"`:

 * `NoisePSK_XX_25519_AESGCM_SHA256`
 * `NoisePSK_N_25519_ChaChaPoly_BLAKE2s` 
 * `NoisePSK_XXfallback_448_AESGCM_SHA512`
 * `NoisePSK_IK_448_ChaChaPoly_BLAKE2b`

12. Application responsibilities
================================

An application built on Noise must consider several issues:

 * **Choosing crypto functions**:  The `25519` DH functions are recommended for
   typical uses, though the `448` DH functions might offer some extra security
   in case a cryptanalytic attack is developed against elliptic curve
   cryptography.  The `448` DH functions should be used with a 512-bit hash
   like `SHA512` or `BLAKE2b`.  The `25519` DH functions may be used with a
   256-bit hash like `SHA256` or `BLAKE2s`, though a 512-bit hash might offer
   some extra security in case a cryptanalytic attack is developed
   against the smaller hash functions.

 * **Extensibility**:  Applications are recommended to use an extensible data
   format for the payloads of all messages (e.g. JSON, Protocol Buffers).  This
   ensures that fields can be added in the future which are ignored by older
   implementations.

 * **Padding**:  Applications are recommended to use a data format for the
   payloads of all encrypted messages that allows padding.  This allows
   implementations to avoid leaking information about message sizes.  Using an
   extensible data format, per the previous bullet, will typically suffice.

 * **Session termination**: Applications must consider that a sequence of Noise
   transport messages could be truncated by an attacker.  Applications should
   include explicit length fields or termination signals inside of transport
   payloads to signal the end of an interactive session, or the end of a
   one-way stream of transport messages. 

 * **Length fields**:  Applications must handle any framing or additional
   length fields for Noise messages, considering that a Noise message may be up
   to 65535 bytes in length.  If an explicit length field is needed,
   applications are recommended to add a 16-bit big-endian length field prior
   to each message.

 * **Type fields**:  Applications are recommended to include a single-byte type
   field prior to each Noise handshake message (and prior to the length field,
   if one is included).  A recommended idiom is for the value zero to indicate
   no change from the current Noise protocol, and for applications to reject
   messages with an unknown value.  This allows future protocol versions to 
   specify handshake re-initialization or any other compatibility-breaking
   change (protocol extensions that don't break compatibility can be handled
   within Noise payloads).

13. Security considerations
===========================

This section collects various security considerations:

 * **Session termination**:  Preventing attackers from truncating a stream of
   transport messages is an application responsibility.  See previous section.

 * **Rollback**:  If parties decide on a Noise protocol based on some previous
   negotiation that is not included as prologue, then a rollback attack might
   be possible.  This is a particular risk with handshake re-initialization,
   and requires careful attention if a Noise handshake is preceded by
   communication between the parties.

 * **Misusing public keys as secrets**: It might be tempting to use a pattern
   with a pre-message public key and assume that a successful handshake implies
   the other party's knowledge of the public key.  Unfortunately, this is not
   true.  For example, a `Noise_NK` initiator might send an invalid ephemeral
   public key to cause a known DH output of all zeros, despite not knowing the
   responder's static public key.  If the parties want to authenticate with a
   shared secret, it must be passed in as a PSK.

 * **Channel binding**:  Depending on the DH functions, it might be possible
   for a malicious party to engage in multiple sessions that derive the same
   shared secret key (e.g. if setting her public keys to invalid values causes
   DH outputs of all zeros, as is the case for the `25519` and `448` DH functions).
   This is why a higher-level protocol should use the handshake hash (`h`) for
   a unique channel binding, instead of `ck`.

 * **Incrementing nonces**:  Reusing a nonce value for `n` with the same key
   `k` for encryption would be catastrophic.  Implementations must carefully
   follow the rules for nonces.  Nonces are not allowed to wrap back to zero
   due to integer overflow.  This means parties are not allowed to send more
   than 2^64 transport messages.

 * **Fresh ephemerals**:  Every party in a Noise protocol should send a new
   ephemeral public key and perform a DH with it prior to sending any encrypted
   data.  Otherwise replay of a handshake message could trigger catastrophic
   key reuse. This is one rationale behind the patterns in [Section 8](#handshake-patterns), and 
   the validity rules in [Section 8.1](#pattern-validity).  It's also the reason why 
   one-way handshakes only allow transport messages from the sender, not the 
   recipient.

 * **Protocol names**:  The protocol name used with `Initialize()` must
   uniquely identify the combination of handshake pattern and crypto functions
   for every key it's used with (whether ephemeral key pair, static key pair,
   or PSK).  If the same secret key was reused with the same protocol name but
   a different set of cryptographic operations then bad interactions could
   occur.

 * **Pre-shared symmetric keys**:  Pre-shared symmetric keys must be secret
   values with 256 bits of entropy.

 * **Data volumes**:  The `AESGCM` cipher functions suffer a gradual reduction
   in security as the volume of data encrypted under a single key increases.
   Due to this, parties should not send more than 2^56 bytes (roughly 72
   petabytes) encrypted by a single key.  If sending such large volumes of data
   is a possibility, different cipher functions should be chosen.

 * **Hash collisions**:  If an attacker can find hash collisions on prologue
   data or the handshake hash, they may be able to perform "transcript
   collision" attacks that trick the parties into having different views of
   handshake data.  It is important to use Noise with
   collision-resistant hash functions, and replace the hash function at any
   sign of weakness.

 * **Implementation fingerprinting**:  If this protocol is used in settings
   with anonymous parties, care should be taken that implementations behave
   identically in all cases.  This may require mandating exact behavior for
   handling of invalid DH public keys.

14. Rationale
=============

This section collects various design rationale:

Nonces are 64 bits in length because:

  * Some ciphers (e.g. Salsa20) only have 64 bit nonces.
  * 64 bit nonces were used in the initial specification and implementations 
    of ChaCha20, so Noise nonces can be used with these implementations.
  * 64 bits makes it easy for the entire nonce to be treated as an integer 
    and incremented.
  * 96 bits nonces (e.g. in RFC 7539) are a confusing size where it's unclear if
    random nonces are acceptable.

The recommended hash function families are SHA2 and BLAKE2 because:

  * SHA2 is widely available.
  * SHA2 is often used alongside AES.
  * BLAKE2 is fast and similar to ChaCha20.

Hash output lengths of both 256 bits and 512 bits are supported because:

  * SHA-256 and BLAKE2s have sufficient collision-resistance at the 128-bit
    security level.
  * SHA-256 and BLAKE2s require less RAM, and less calculation when processing 
    smaller inputs (due to smaller block size), than their larger brethren
    (SHA-512 and BLAKE2b).
  * SHA-256 and BLAKE2s are faster on 32-bit processors than their larger 
    brethren.

Cipher keys and pre-shared keys are 256 bits because:

  * 256 bits is a conservative length for cipher keys when considering 
    cryptanalytic safety margins, time/memory tradeoffs, multi-key attacks, and 
    quantum attacks.
  * Pre-shared key length is fixed to simplify testing and implementation, and
    to deter users from mistakenly using low-entropy passwords as pre-shared keys.

The authentication data in a ciphertext is 128 bits because:

  * Some algorithms (e.g. GCM) lose more security than an ideal MAC when 
    truncated.
  * Noise may be used in a wide variety of contexts, including where attackers
    can receive rapid feedback on whether MAC guesses are correct.
  * A single fixed length is simpler than supporting variable-length tags.

The GCM security limit is 2^56 bytes because:

  * This is 2^52 AES blocks (each block is 16 bytes).  The limit is based on
   the risk of birthday collisions being used to rule out plaintext guesses.
   The probability an attacker could rule out a random guess on a 2^56 byte
   plaintext is less than 1 in 1 million (roughly (2^52 * 2^52) / 2^128).

Big-endian length fields are recommended because:

  * Length fields are likely to be handled by parsing code where 
    big-endian "network byte order" is traditional.
  * Some ciphers use big-endian internally (e.g. GCM, SHA2).
  * While it's true that Curve25519, Curve448, and ChaCha20/Poly1305 use 
    little-endian, these will likely be handled by specialized libraries, so 
    there's not a strong argument for aligning with them.

The `MixKey()` design uses `HKDF` because:

  * HKDF applies multiple layers of hashing between each `MixKey()` input.  This
    "extra" hashing might mitigate the impact of hash function weakness.
  * HKDF is well-known and is used in similar ways in other protocols (e.g.
    Signal, IPsec).
  * HKDF and HMAC are widely-used constructions.  If some weakness is found in a
    hash function, cryptanalysts will likely analyze that weakness in the
    context of HKDF and HMAC.

`MixHash()` is used instead of sending all inputs through `MixKey()` because:

  * `MixHash()` is more efficient than `MixKey()`.
  * `MixHash()` avoids any IPR concerns regarding mixing identity data into
     session keys (see KEA+).
  * `MixHash()` produces a non-secret `h` value that might be useful to
     higher-level protocols, e.g. for channel-binding.

The `h` value hashes handshake ciphertext instead of plaintext because:

  * This ensures `h` is a non-secret value that can be used for channel-binding or
    other purposes without leaking secret information.
  * This provides stronger guarantees against ciphertext malleability. 

Session termination is left to the application because:

  * Providing a termination signal in Noise doesn't help the application much, 
    since the application still has to use the signal correctly.
  * For an application with its own termination signal, having a 
    second termination signal in Noise is likely to be confusing rather than helpful.



15. IPR
========

The Noise specification (this document) is hereby placed in the public domain.

16. Acknowledgements
=====================

Noise is inspired by the NaCl and CurveCP protocols from Dan Bernstein et al.,
and also by HOMQV and SIGMA from Hugo Krawczyk.

General feedback on the spec and design came from: Moxie Marlinspike, Jason
Donenfeld, Tiffany Bennett, Jonathan Rudenberg, Stephen Touset, Tony Arcieri,
Rhys Weatherley, and Alex Wied.

Thanks to Tom Ritter, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, and David Wong for editorial
feedback.

Moxie Marlinspike, Hugo Krawczyk, Samuel Neves, Christian Winnerlein, J.P.
Aumasson, and Jason Donenfeld provided helpful input and feedback on the key
derivation design.

The BLAKE2 team (in particular J.P. Aumasson, Samuel Neves, and Zooko) provided
helpful discussion on using BLAKE2 with Noise.

Jeremy Clark, Thomas Ristenpart, and Joe Bonneau gave feedback on much earlier
versions.
